NEAR 🤝 Ethereum 
Guides / By futured.near / 13 minutes of reading
Today, Ethereum is the number one smart contract platform in the crypto space, with a majority of smart contracts and decentralized applications based (dApps) based on its blockchain. Like Ethereum, there are several other smart contract platforms in the market as well. 

However, just because Ethereum is the number one platform when it comes to smart contracts and DeFi, does not mean it does not have problems. Ethereum has one glaring problem, and that is significant scalability problems. It just cannot get its network to scale. 

This is where the NEAR Protocol comes into the picture. NEAR’s USP is that it uses a Proof-of-Stake consensus mechanism that utilizes sharding. Before we dive deeper, let us get to know both Ethereum and NEAR. 
What Is Ethereum? 
If you look at Ethereum’s definition on its website, it is as follows –

“Ethereum is a technology that’s home to digital money, global payments, and applications. The community has built a booming digital economy, bold new ways for creators to earn online, and so much more. It’s open to everyone, wherever you are in the world.”

Founded in 2015 by Vitalik Buterin, Ethereum has firmly established itself as the second-largest cryptocurrency by market capitalization, second only to Bitcoin. Ethereum builds upon Bitcoin’s blockchain, making it more than just another cryptocurrency that allows users to send or receive value without any third-party intervention. 

Ethereum ensures decentralization by replacing central servers with thousands of nodes, ensuring that the platform is always online and free from any third-party influence. Smart contracts also form an integral part of Ethereum’s ecosystem, and because the platform supports both decentralized applications and smart contracts, it is exceptionally appealing to developers and users alike. 

Ethereum is now moving to Ethereum 2.0 or Serenity. The upgrade will significantly improve the blockchain’s scalability, efficiency, and speed of the Ethereum blockchain. In addition, the upgrade will allow Ethereum to reduce gas costs and process more transactions, improving the scalability of the blockchain without compromising on security. 

The upgrade will also see Ethereum switch to a Proof-of-Stake consensus mechanism. PoS will see validators who have been chosen algorithmically provide security to the platform. The validators will secure the platform by locking up their ETH. Any validator that acts against the interest of the platform has their stake slashed, ensuring the platform’s security. 
What Is the NEAR Protocol? 
The NEAR Protocol came into existence in the summer of 2018. A decentralized development platform, the protocol was designed to create the perfect environment for decentralized applications, focusing on the shortcomings of other platforms in the smart contract and dApp space. These shortcomings are mainly issues with low speeds, low throughput, and poor compatibility with other chains. 

NEAR operates on top of the NEAR Protocol, a Proof-of-Stake (PoS) blockchain, incorporating several features and innovations to reduce costs and improve scalability for both users and developers. In addition, NEAR takes a unique approach to “Sharding.”

It also introduces a block generation mechanism called “Doomslug” that was proposed in 2019. Doomslug allows practical or “Doomslug” finality, ensuring that the blocks receive finality in seconds.

The protocol is based on the same technology as Bitcoin, combining it with features such as database sharding. NEAR Protocol is built from scratch and is the most accessible network for end-users and developers while also ensuring scalability and security. 

Most scalable blockchains centralize processing, limiting it to high-end hardware, which provides a temporary boost to their throughput, NEAR allows the platform to scale linearly, upto billions of transactions in a completely decentralized way. 

NEAR is developed by the NEAR collective, a community of developers and researchers collaborating on building the project. Some important features of NEAR are 

NEAR is a sharded system that allows for infinite scalability. 
An easy-to-use protocol, NEAR allows developers to build apps easily and quickly. 
NEAR is not a side chain but a Layer-1 protocol. 
dApps created using NEAR run on top of the underlying NEAR layer. 
What Is The NEAR Collective? 
NEAR Collective comprises individual organizations and other contributors that are continuously working on improving the NEAR Protocol. The Collective works on projects such as writing the initial code and implementation for the NEAR Network. NEAR is completely decentralized, operating independently and cannot be shut down or manipulated, even by those that built it.

The NEAR Collective has members such as the NEAR Foundation. The NEAR Foundation is a non-profit organization that is focused on creating a vibrant ecosystem around the NEAR blockchain. It helps in the coordination of governance activities and development. The NEAR Collective has several projects, with the NEAR blockchain just one of several projects under the aegis of the collective. 

Why Are Blockchains Like NEAR Necessary? 
To understand this, we must first understand the evolution of blockchain technology. Blockchain can be divided into three stages or generations. First-generation blockchains were designed to be a simple payment mechanism. Bitcoin is an example of a first-generation blockchain that has firmly established itself in the crypto space as the number one platform. However, first-generation blockchains have limitations when it comes to complex transactions. 

Second-generation blockchain platforms came to the fore with Ethereum and the concept of smart contracts, allowing developers to use them and program more sophisticated transactions and creating dApps. But second-generation blockchains suffer from severe scalability issues. For example, Ethereum can process only about 25 transactions per second, compare this number with mainstream platforms like Visa or PayPal, and you can see how far behind Ethereum is lagging. 

Ethereum has tried to fix its scalability issues by implementing Layer-2 solutions like the plasma protocol, creating an additional layer that runs in tandem with the main chain. However, Layer-2 solutions still have not gained enough traction. 

This brings us to NEAR, a third-generation blockchain. NEAR discards the idea that each node on the network has to run the entire code as the team believes that all it does is create bottlenecks. Instead, the blockchain fixes scalability issues by utilizing a sharding technique, allowing the blockchain to scale up the network’s capacity. And unlike second-generation blockchains that use a Layer-2 solution, sharding is a Layer-1 solution. 
